---
title: v0.4.0 announcement
categories: annoucement
---

v0.4.0 is a major rewrite of large parts of the library.

**This is a breaking release. Take special care to test your rules if you want to upgrade.**

_This is a pre-release annoucement. It will be updated as work gets completed._

<!--more-->

## Overlays

Overlays were intended to work as a layered filesystem, but in reality this only worked with assertions and positive matchers. They have now been completely rewritten to work with all existing matchers and track both assertions and retractions correctly.

**Breaking change**: only the current (top-most) overlay may be used for asserting and retracting facts. Doing this with a lower overlay will cause undefined behaviour. It may be implemented in a future release, or the restriction may become enforced if no good solution is found.

A lower overlay is again available for modification once the higher one goes out of scope.

## Timelines

**Breaking change**: the timeline functionality has been removed. It may return in a future release.

## Aggregates

Aggregates were introduced as an experimental feature in the 0.3.x lineage. They went through a number of redesigns and are now finalized.

## Performance

Matchers with variables should now be faster when the variables are already bound by preceding matchers.

Consider the rule:

```ruby
forall {
	has :P, :symmetric, true
	has :X, :P, :Y
}
```

During rule compilation the second matcher must be connected to the most generic alpha memory `{_, _, _}`, because all three triple elements are variables. However, using this alpha is wasteful in beta activation, because in that context `P` is already bound to a value, and we would be iterating through a lot of facts which are guaranteed to not match. In 0.4.0, the join nodes can make use of this information to find a more selective pre-filtered set of facts given the already bound variables.

In addition to this, a number of other performance improvements has been made.

## Other known breaking changes

`Network#select` now returns a live enumerator instead of an `Array`. If you want to alter the fact set while iterating over it, capture it with `#to_a` first.

Custom actions (`action { |token| … }` and other forms) should now extract and save bound variables if they need them instead of just keeping the token reference, because the tokens now get destroyed more eagerly.
